{"uri":"bowers-meeting-notes-4-4-18-paudiew","version_id":"0","protocol_name":"Bowers Meeting Notes 4\/4\/18","protocol_name_html":"Bowers Meeting Notes 4\/4\/18","is_prepublished":"0","can_edit":"0","parent_id":null,"api_version":"1","is_new_mode":"0","last_modified":"1523291754","type_id":"4","link":null,"fork_id":"","public_fork_note":"","number_of_steps":"1","has_versions":"0","first_published_date":"1523291754","publish_date":"2018-04-09 16:35:54","documents":"[{\"url\":\"https:\/\/s3.amazonaws.com\/pr-journal\/vqmdrwe.docx\",\"file_id\":\"19915\",\"thumb_url\":\"\/img\/extensions\/docx.png\",\"ofn\":\"HAB meeting \u2013 Bowers meeting notes.docx\"}]","have_protocol_in_step":"0","is_protocol_in_step":"0","vendor_name":"Contributed by users","vendor_link":"https:\/\/www.protocols.io","vendor_logo":"\/img\/vendors\/1.png","mod_mins":"-45","mod_secs":"1","description":null,"is_bookmarked":"0","can_reassign":"1","before_start":null,"has_guidelines":"0","materials":[],"warning":null,"version_class":"11316","public":"1","is_owner":"1","is_original_owner":"1","created_on":"1523075623","protocol_affiliation":"Moss Landing Marine Labs","affiliation":"Moss Landing Marine Labs","doi":"dx.doi.org\/10.17504\/protocols.io.paudiew","doi_status":"2","changed_fork_steps":null,"profile_url":"AprilWoods-w2x25433x2","protocol_img":"https:\/\/www.protocols.io\/img\/default_protocol.png","profile_image":"https:\/\/s3.amazonaws.com\/pr-journal\/gyxdrwe.png","full_name":"April Woods","created_by":"April Woods","private_link":"5FDDEAEDD2B4EE9A195ACE94E2FB64B8","original_img":"1","username":"april-woods","is_retracted":"0","retraction_reason":null,"plos_id":null,"manuscript_citation":null,"journal_name":null,"is_donations_disabled":"0","is_donations_disabled_by_user":"9","item_record_id":302036,"fork_info":[],"compare_forks":[],"protocols":[],"groups":[{"group_id":"657","group_uri":"haboos","group_name":"HAB-OOS","group_logo":"","requested_uid":null,"request_flag":null,"my_request":"1"}],"number_of_shared_runs":[],"ownership_history":[],"keywords":"","transfer_to_user":[],"sub_transfer":false,"is_transfer_pending":false,"number_of_bookmarks":"0","collections":[],"tags":[],"archived":0,"sub_authors":[],"sub_protocols_number":0,"can_edit_shared":0,"shared_runs":[],"is_shared_run":0,"is_shared":1,"banner":null,"contact_badges":[{"badge_id":"1","badge_image":"\/img\/ambassador.svg","badge_description":"Ambassador"},{"badge_id":"3","badge_image":"\/img\/badges\/silver.svg","badge_description":"Power author!"},{"badge_id":"5","badge_image":"\/img\/badges\/earlyadopter.svg","badge_description":"Early adopter"},{"badge_id":"6","badge_image":"\/img\/badges\/socialbutterfly.svg","badge_description":"Social butterfly"}],"number_of_comments":0,"is_locked":0,"is_locked_by":false,"authors":"Holly Bowers","authors_list":[{"name":"Holly Bowers","affiliation":"Moss Landing Marine Labs","username":"holly-bowers","profile_image":"https:\/\/s3.amazonaws.com\/pr-journal\/i6jew9n.jpg"}],"user":{"profile_image":"https:\/\/s3.amazonaws.com\/pr-journal\/gyxdrwe.png","username":"april-woods","full_name":"April Woods","created_by":"April Woods"},"access":{"can_view":"1","can_remove":"0","can_add":"0","can_edit":0,"can_publish":0,"can_get_doi":0,"can_share":"0","can_move":"1","can_transfer":"1","can_download":"1","is_locked":"0"},"is_contact_suspended":0,"guidelines":null,"status_id":"3","is_research":"0","status_info":"meeting notes","steps":[{"id":"619482","is_changed":"0","original_id":"0","is_skipped":"0","is_checked":"0","guid":"964E7760A0584C58B1E429608E1DB108","previous_guid":null,"previous_id":"0","last_modified":"1523075776","components":[{"component_id":"1085092","previous_id":0,"original_id":"0","guid":"349B5DFB99B04786ACC820C9D6DC81EA","previous_guid":null,"component_type_id":"6","data_id":"0","data":"","order_id":"0","name":"Section","data_by_id":"0","type_id":"6","source_data":{"section":""},"is_project":0},{"component_id":"1085091","previous_id":"1085092","original_id":"0","guid":"3091CD7024224B28A5F0E933AC62A110","previous_guid":"349B5DFB99B04786ACC820C9D6DC81EA","component_type_id":"1","data_id":null,"data":"<p>HAB meeting \u2013 SCCWRP<\/p>\n<p>April 4, 2018<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>HABMAP started from complaint from NCCOS (ECOHAB, MERHAB) b\/c they wanted to see products for user community. CA had 18 different programs going on at the time. There wasn\u2019t a lot of data sharing or standardization going on.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Goals from 10 years ago:<\/p>\n<p>Coordination of sampling<\/p>\n<p>Method synchronization<\/p>\n<p>Data sharing and reporting<\/p>\n<p>Develop client base<\/p>\n<p>Forecasting system<\/p>\n<p>Need to pay attention to cyanobacteria<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>CenCOOS \u2013 harmonization of data, working towards the state vision<\/p>\n<p>Derived data through having something useful for downstream user\/stakeholder<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>State wants info coming from single place, why this group formed<\/p>\n<p>-intent to pull in OR and WA<\/p>\n<p>-no real support from State, OPC paid for website<\/p>\n<p>-hard to get state support for monitoring<\/p>\n<p>-also, get others to use data<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>What\u2019s going on in PNW?<\/p>\n<p>Jan Newton at NanOOS<\/p>\n<p>Steph Moore<\/p>\n<p>PICES \u2013 annual HAB report, CA contributes<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Need to put methods on website so folks who use the data understand how it was derived.<\/p>\n<p>-tried before but hard because labs that do shore sampling are using different concentrations, scopes, preservation, etc.<\/p>\n<p>-they have tried to do interlab comparisons in the past, results were hard, need to spin this up again and get PIs together<\/p>\n<p>-there is a spreadsheet with methods for all the stations, need to include this in the metadata<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Each OOS is getting RICE certification \u2013 laborious and have to document from shore stations, can do it for sensors, but hard for phyto, nutrients, etc.<\/p>\n<p>(regional information coordination entity)<\/p>\n<p>-we need to come together for baselines, etc.<\/p>\n<p>-go through QARTOD guidelines? Problem comes with sending samples to one place, cost, time and sample can change<\/p>\n<p>-chlorophyll has been more consistent \u2013 counts have been challenging<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Jargon comes from instruments, hard to bring into out datasets<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>**Send around template to groups to survey and get input for best practices.<\/p>\n<p>-will be a stepwise process<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>CA has the most comprehensive monitoring program within the OOS system.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Starting point: everyone document protocols in detail<\/p>\n<p>-could start reporting analytical checks<\/p>\n<p>-run industry standards and report<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>SCRIPPS is going through now and validating all their data in spreadsheets, changing it now to help eliminate mistakes, making it more automated<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>***downloading spreadsheets to a csv, will translate nd to NaN, problem is on the SCOOS side<\/p>\n<p>**the archive needs to be corrected and updated, looks like some of the sample volumes are going into other columns too?<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>From 2008 meeting, they were just going to provide a synopsis on HABs and if there was a problem, or does it look like something might happen<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Are e-mails being archived on SCCWRP?<\/p>\n<p>Fred is working on an AI method for going through e-mails for those data<\/p>\n<p>-pulls out species names and relative abundance value from e-mails that have been going out and puts it into one source<\/p>\n<p>-e-mails are too quirky, no standardized list of plankton<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>State agencies are interested in the data, informs them for monitoring, etc.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Folks with imaging, modeling, genetic interests want the data but are used to time\/cost level that they have. We need to have a funded, sustainable program (via working better with these groups?). We don\u2019t have a registration\/metric to even know how many people are using the data.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Bulletin \u2013 1 page of weekly interpretation of what is happening (marine mammal data, our monitoring results)\u2026\u2026tool for managers\/state agencies to use to get overall view of what is happening. Vicky and Clarissa will be working to pull this together over next 6 months. \u00a0\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>-need to reach a wide audience, many will understand, but others (fishing community?) need to understand as well<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Steve SCCWRP: current themes: desalination, aquaculture, climate change, OA and HABs<\/p>\n<p>--we have lots of datasets to begin to tackle these<\/p>\n<p>Have an Impetus: back then, used to CA World Ocean conference to get HAB advances out there (event or issue oriented theme)<\/p>\n<p>**e.g. government\u2019s summit in San Fran this fall<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>OBIS Ocean biogeographic info system, global initiative<\/p>\n<p>--evaluate trends and ID gaps<\/p>\n<p>--they don\u2019t have HAB data, we should push our data into this<\/p>\n<p>--UN driven, funded through IOC, from Belgium \u2013 wants to take over the world, would be glad to have our data, involved with GOOS, GlobalHAB\u2026data hub for international programs<\/p>\n<p>--e.g. MBON funneling into this.<\/p>\n<p>--they collect all records, some from Census of Marine life (which shuts down), so some things are not represented well (e.g. CA data are nil)<\/p>\n<p>--OBIS is superceding WoRMs. Federal US agencies are not involved\/interested b\/c of UN funding and their political relationships<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>WoRMS has species ID, we could put those numbers into our data sets<\/p>\n<p>--catchall number for Pn groups<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Ocean Best Practices group is in existence<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>OPC-OST HAB workshop in march with state agencies<\/p>\n<p>-fishermen want to know why regulations where they are, but it\u2019s federal so nobody can change it<\/p>\n<p>-no resolution, state wants fishermen to help collect samples, but they shoot themselves in the foot with potential shut-down of a fishery<\/p>\n<p>-no trust between the two groups, yet no formal collaborations for collection<\/p>\n<p>-will use bulletin to try and disseminate digestible info for watermen reps to take back to their groups\/communities<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>We don\u2019t want to be putting all HAB data through one group, so funding agent might see that as one group doing HABs so they should get money<\/p>\n<p>-Talk about unification of HABMAP data<\/p>\n<p>-higher level synthesis for the year, then click on and drill down into data<\/p>\n<p>-be able to pull in other data sets<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Samples that come in for testing, they need 6 along the coast, if two from same area test positive two weeks in a row there is a closure\u2026..needs to be clean two weeks in a row to be re-opened.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>TASKS<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>--survey end users (start with J-Sac group; Google doc for out HABMAP group to add to); meeting in Sacramento for conversation \u2013 re: bulletin<\/p>\n<p>--streamline protocols<\/p>\n<p>--build template for reporting data<\/p>\n<p>--CenCOOS: extending stations north of SC, Bodego doing unofficial work, physical data still comes from Humboldt station (counts are happening, but they don\u2019t leave Humboldt), Raphe trying to get San Fran as part of HABMAP<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>","order_id":"1","name":"Description","data_by_id":"0","type_id":"1","source_data":{"description":"<p>HAB meeting \u2013 SCCWRP<\/p>\n<p>April 4, 2018<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>HABMAP started from complaint from NCCOS (ECOHAB, MERHAB) b\/c they wanted to see products for user community. CA had 18 different programs going on at the time. There wasn\u2019t a lot of data sharing or standardization going on.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Goals from 10 years ago:<\/p>\n<p>Coordination of sampling<\/p>\n<p>Method synchronization<\/p>\n<p>Data sharing and reporting<\/p>\n<p>Develop client base<\/p>\n<p>Forecasting system<\/p>\n<p>Need to pay attention to cyanobacteria<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>CenCOOS \u2013 harmonization of data, working towards the state vision<\/p>\n<p>Derived data through having something useful for downstream user\/stakeholder<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>State wants info coming from single place, why this group formed<\/p>\n<p>-intent to pull in OR and WA<\/p>\n<p>-no real support from State, OPC paid for website<\/p>\n<p>-hard to get state support for monitoring<\/p>\n<p>-also, get others to use data<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>What\u2019s going on in PNW?<\/p>\n<p>Jan Newton at NanOOS<\/p>\n<p>Steph Moore<\/p>\n<p>PICES \u2013 annual HAB report, CA contributes<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Need to put methods on website so folks who use the data understand how it was derived.<\/p>\n<p>-tried before but hard because labs that do shore sampling are using different concentrations, scopes, preservation, etc.<\/p>\n<p>-they have tried to do interlab comparisons in the past, results were hard, need to spin this up again and get PIs together<\/p>\n<p>-there is a spreadsheet with methods for all the stations, need to include this in the metadata<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Each OOS is getting RICE certification \u2013 laborious and have to document from shore stations, can do it for sensors, but hard for phyto, nutrients, etc.<\/p>\n<p>(regional information coordination entity)<\/p>\n<p>-we need to come together for baselines, etc.<\/p>\n<p>-go through QARTOD guidelines? Problem comes with sending samples to one place, cost, time and sample can change<\/p>\n<p>-chlorophyll has been more consistent \u2013 counts have been challenging<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Jargon comes from instruments, hard to bring into out datasets<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>**Send around template to groups to survey and get input for best practices.<\/p>\n<p>-will be a stepwise process<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>CA has the most comprehensive monitoring program within the OOS system.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Starting point: everyone document protocols in detail<\/p>\n<p>-could start reporting analytical checks<\/p>\n<p>-run industry standards and report<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>SCRIPPS is going through now and validating all their data in spreadsheets, changing it now to help eliminate mistakes, making it more automated<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>***downloading spreadsheets to a csv, will translate nd to NaN, problem is on the SCOOS side<\/p>\n<p>**the archive needs to be corrected and updated, looks like some of the sample volumes are going into other columns too?<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>From 2008 meeting, they were just going to provide a synopsis on HABs and if there was a problem, or does it look like something might happen<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Are e-mails being archived on SCCWRP?<\/p>\n<p>Fred is working on an AI method for going through e-mails for those data<\/p>\n<p>-pulls out species names and relative abundance value from e-mails that have been going out and puts it into one source<\/p>\n<p>-e-mails are too quirky, no standardized list of plankton<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>State agencies are interested in the data, informs them for monitoring, etc.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Folks with imaging, modeling, genetic interests want the data but are used to time\/cost level that they have. We need to have a funded, sustainable program (via working better with these groups?). We don\u2019t have a registration\/metric to even know how many people are using the data.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Bulletin \u2013 1 page of weekly interpretation of what is happening (marine mammal data, our monitoring results)\u2026\u2026tool for managers\/state agencies to use to get overall view of what is happening. Vicky and Clarissa will be working to pull this together over next 6 months. \u00a0\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>-need to reach a wide audience, many will understand, but others (fishing community?) need to understand as well<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Steve SCCWRP: current themes: desalination, aquaculture, climate change, OA and HABs<\/p>\n<p>--we have lots of datasets to begin to tackle these<\/p>\n<p>Have an Impetus: back then, used to CA World Ocean conference to get HAB advances out there (event or issue oriented theme)<\/p>\n<p>**e.g. government\u2019s summit in San Fran this fall<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>OBIS Ocean biogeographic info system, global initiative<\/p>\n<p>--evaluate trends and ID gaps<\/p>\n<p>--they don\u2019t have HAB data, we should push our data into this<\/p>\n<p>--UN driven, funded through IOC, from Belgium \u2013 wants to take over the world, would be glad to have our data, involved with GOOS, GlobalHAB\u2026data hub for international programs<\/p>\n<p>--e.g. MBON funneling into this.<\/p>\n<p>--they collect all records, some from Census of Marine life (which shuts down), so some things are not represented well (e.g. CA data are nil)<\/p>\n<p>--OBIS is superceding WoRMs. Federal US agencies are not involved\/interested b\/c of UN funding and their political relationships<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>WoRMS has species ID, we could put those numbers into our data sets<\/p>\n<p>--catchall number for Pn groups<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Ocean Best Practices group is in existence<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>OPC-OST HAB workshop in march with state agencies<\/p>\n<p>-fishermen want to know why regulations where they are, but it\u2019s federal so nobody can change it<\/p>\n<p>-no resolution, state wants fishermen to help collect samples, but they shoot themselves in the foot with potential shut-down of a fishery<\/p>\n<p>-no trust between the two groups, yet no formal collaborations for collection<\/p>\n<p>-will use bulletin to try and disseminate digestible info for watermen reps to take back to their groups\/communities<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>We don\u2019t want to be putting all HAB data through one group, so funding agent might see that as one group doing HABs so they should get money<\/p>\n<p>-Talk about unification of HABMAP data<\/p>\n<p>-higher level synthesis for the year, then click on and drill down into data<\/p>\n<p>-be able to pull in other data sets<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>Samples that come in for testing, they need 6 along the coast, if two from same area test positive two weeks in a row there is a closure\u2026..needs to be clean two weeks in a row to be re-opened.<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>TASKS<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>--survey end users (start with J-Sac group; Google doc for out HABMAP group to add to); meeting in Sacramento for conversation \u2013 re: bulletin<\/p>\n<p>--streamline protocols<\/p>\n<p>--build template for reporting data<\/p>\n<p>--CenCOOS: extending stations north of SC, Bodego doing unofficial work, physical data still comes from Humboldt station (counts are happening, but they don\u2019t leave Humboldt), Raphe trying to get San Fran as part of HABMAP<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>\n<p>\u00a0<\/p>"},"is_project":0}]}]}